So thanks.
Thank you very much for that wonderful call.
It's interesting that my 11-year-old daughter just finished reading.
It took her about a month or six weeks, but she just finished reading Little Women, and she would not allow herself to watch the video of that wonderful movie until she'd finished it.
And she said, Dad, 476 pages.
She said, it's the longest book I've ever read.
I said, honey, I think that's a bigger book than many people, adults, have read.
Mm-hmm.
I'm very proud of her.
But moving books, I think, has to be the most difficult, the most formidable thing that anybody could be faced with.
Gene, you mentioned earlier the weight of the books.
I mean, it's awesome.
I think when you think of how many boxes it might take to fill a library of 5,000 books or even 1,500 books, Stephen Blumberg, the book thief, when they seized his books, 23,000, it was something like 879 books.
packing crates, 17 FBI agents.
It took them two days to remove these books from that house.
So what this woman has just described, moving often with a lot of books, it's not an easy thing to do.
Is that part of what makes it seem so precious, the fact that it's so substantial?
Well, in terms of bulk, I don't know.
Volume, weight, density.
It makes you think twice before you decide to move, though, that's for sure.
Do women make more frequent collectors than men?
Historically, it's been the other way around.
In fact, there have been some very foolish observations that women never had the bug at all.
I totally...
disprove that in my book.
And I think one of the reasons they haven't collected with the same frequency is men are for the reasons that are obvious.
I mean, they never had the means.
One woman says, you know, having been considered possessions ourselves, I mean, so I don't want to get into this, but it's a valid argument.
How could they possibly collect when they didn't have the means or the wherewithal or not even considered intelligence enough to do it?
I mean,
And not, in many cases, even permitted to become literate.
Exactly.
We're not even allowed to read or go to school.
But I think that when you get by that, you find that, well, Louise Taper, the woman I write about out in California, who has undeniably the world's greatest collection of Lincoln material,
she's fortunate, she has the means to indulge this fascination for Lincoln, but boy, once she's into it, I mean, she's as tenacious and aggressive and acquisitive as any male you're likely to see, and probably even more successful.
Well, she is more successful.
It's a great collection of Lincoln material in private hands now.
Green Bay, go ahead.
Yes, it's sort of like a side issue regarding your books.
I don't know if any of you have ever been to Concord, Massachusetts, but one of the prettiest cemeteries, I think, in this country is the cemetery in Concord called Sleepy Hollow.
And in the back of the cemetery is an area called Writer's Ridge.
And on that ridge, or it's an uplifting area of land, you just feel like you sort of walk back into a solemn time of writers.
There you'll find Thoreau.
this family, Emerson, Walcott, all the great transcendental writers.
All in the same cemetery?
And they're all, it's on Writers' Ridge, and you have to sort of sneak around until you find them, unless you know where it is.
And also, oh, there's a great early writer, Hawthorne, as I said, Emerson, Thoreau, Walcott.
There's a number of others there, and they're all buried in the same place with their families.
And it's the most solemn place you've ever seen.
It's just beautiful.
I don't know if anybody can still be buried there, but, you know, people who like writings and that, and I certainly enjoy that.
I have stacks of books in my house.
I just stack them up.
I ran out of space, so what I just do is I lay one on top of another, and that's where I leave them, and I don't put them in boxes.
And sometimes something comes out, and you pull a book back out, and you go back through it, or you have people over here talking about a book,
And you say, oh, yeah, and you go and get it.
I just couldn't put books in boxes.
I think that's perverse.
It's interesting.
Where I sit, I'm about 25 or so miles from Concord.
And as I mentioned, when my daughter finished reading Little Women just a couple weeks ago, I promised her a day trip to Concord to visit these very same specific places the gentleman just mentioned.
One of the great beauties of Concord is that it's
It's very much the same way it was in the 19th century.
Walden Pond is there.
It's beautiful.
The homes, the Emerson home, they're all just intact the way they were.
It's a beautiful, beautiful place.
And that cemetery really is an awesome, inspirational place to visit.
Hello?
Yeah.
I didn't die.
I'm sorry.
I guess I should have put a period on there.
No.
Moved off to Riders Ridge.
Madison, go ahead.
Is that me?
Yes.
I have a question for your guest.
I have about 1,000 books, and I had about 1,100.
And as a result of moving, I went through the books and gave away about 100, which I knew I would never read again.
My question is, the books that I kept, which I only realized much later, are history, geography, history,
biographies, dictionaries, and most of them are either writings on philosophy or religion.
And I was just wondering, does this indicate anything to your guest?
Well, of course it does.
It certainly indicates eclectic taste.
In terms of rarity, again, let me please stress and restress, and to go back to that gentleman earlier who mentioned the 1852 primer,
I am not an authority on what is valuable and what isn't, but I certainly have some sense.
It sounds to me like what you're saying you have are a lot of textbooks, perhaps, which regrettably don't have any monetary value that I know of.
However, there could be exceptions if they're very old and scarce.
I would suggest with a thousand books, if they're old, you really didn't give any sense of how old they might be.
Some of them are quite old.
And I am not interested in getting rid of them.
I don't care whether they're valuable or not.
They're valuable to me.
Well, there you go.
That's the most important thing, in my view.
The value is personal and not monetary.
It sounds like if they're old, like 19th century books, it might just be a wonderful collection of books of how people were educated and what they read for pleasure and intellectual stimulation 50 or whatever, 100 years or so ago, if they're 19th century books.
I love 19th century books.
american books not just for the content but for the titles for the nice beautiful old american bindings of pictorial cloth gold guilt i just swoon when i see a beautiful old book and it doesn't even matter what the content is sometimes nicholas bezbanes with us talking about his gentle madness bibliophiles bibliomains and the eternal passion for books
His own book bears that title and is beautiful.
If you'd like to join us on the air, the number is 1-800-642-1234.
In Madison or Milwaukee, 263-1890.
This is the Ideas Network of Wisconsin Public Radio.
I'm Jean Farocca.
Something of value comes from our afternoon discussions.
We hear many different points of view from our guests and our listeners, and we end each day a little more informed.
I'm Kathleen Dunn.
Join the talk from 3 until 5, weekday afternoons on the Ideas Network of Wisconsin Public Radio.
From heartworm problems to special diets, find the answers to questions about your pets.
Next hour, Larry Mueller will be talking with a veterinarian.
Our next caller joins us from Phillips.
Yes, I just wanted to say that my husband called about five minutes to 10 and said that I should turn on this program because he finally discovered the disease that was afflicting him, which he and I both collect...
He is just an avid reader, and it seems like everywhere we go, if we travel somewhere, we collect books from that location.
If we see a program on TV that interests us, we buy books.
And I think the wonderful thing about it, in addition to just loving books, our children have always been able to come home and say, I have to do a report on this or so, and is there anything that we have...
on that and almost invariably we can find it and uh my husband's cardinal rule is uh if you have the books you can do the research and um we we we all love books in fact our son has just gone to work at the new barns and noble bookstore in minneapolis which uh is you know we go over there and that's a day outing for us so i think uh this
Your depth has just, I think, touched the soul of many people.
My sentiments precisely.
There are books that we will see or we'll want to get, and they may not interest me or my wife directly, but we'll say, well, perhaps one of the girls might be able to use this book in writing a paper or research.
It's really wonderful, the resources that you have in your house, how you can assist their work.
You know, this woman has touched on something that's very interesting, the fact that she collects books with her husband.
Now, this can be really, truly wonderful.
On the one hand, it can be synergistic where you can produce something that's greater than the sum of its parts.
But on the other hand, you almost wonder if it isn't a good idea to have somebody who can hold you in check.
I know in this household, my wife shares the passion, and we will go looking at yard sales or flea markets or
second-hand bookstores, and I will see something that I absolutely have to have.
It would be wonderful if there was something to say, are you crazy?
Dare we afford this thing?
But she will always, especially if it's beautiful illustrated books with engravings, she loves books on gardening and animals and that sort of thing.
Invariably we'll wind up adding another book that we certainly probably don't need.
to the library, but it is a great deal of fun to go out and gather books with people.
Are you selective at all about what you love?
I'm sorry, yes, and you have to be because, and I think I try to draw the distinction of the book between, the book is about collectors, it's not about accumulators, and there's the famous case of the Calder Brothers in New York City who back in the 1940s
quite literally died under the weight of their own books and magazines.
And when they cleaned this place out, there was 150 tons of what was considered to be junk.
It probably mostly was, which went off to the dump.
But there was no focus to anything that they had.
So we don't really consider them collectors.
We consider them accumulators.
Yeah, there has to be a focus.
There have to be things that are meaningful to you and that you want.
And I think a true collector does...
acquire the books that have meaning for them.
I think that's the essence of collecting is discrimination and focus.
Tell us a little bit about collection in history.
The monks, for example, of the Middle Ages, who dedicated their lives to the preservation of manuscripts, and how we've benefited from that.
And I'm thinking also of some of the precious books that were lost forever, like the poetry of Sappho, like so many of the plays of the Greek tragedians.
Well, the monks, of course, we...
we owe so much to them.
I mean, the whole of classical literature that has survived can be traced to the fact that they grew up this, they developed this institution where monks were charged with copying text, not necessarily reading and learning from them, although I'm sure, and I'm certain many of them did, but there were no printing presses then, and the only way to
to multiply the copies was to, in fact, copy them by hand.
And so I think it's evident what these various monks did.
Going back in history, you talk about the loss of the poetry of Sappho and how many of the great Greek tragedies survived.
In the case of Sophocles and Aeschylus and Euripides, perhaps six or seven out of a hundred, 110 in each case,
Most of them were destroyed or were burned with the destruction of the Alexandrian library.
Fortunately, some were preserved and saved and got down into later centuries where they were copied by these monks who passed them on.
And the humanists came along in the 1300s and 1400s and reclaimed them and passed them on to us.
They were collectors, certainly, weren't they, these Renaissance men?
And so much of the way culture evolves has to do with its preservation.
I think so, and not only how it evolves, but how we even have any record of it.
I think I point out that so much of what we know about culture and literature and history would be lost forever if it weren't for these people who collected.
And so often these collectors aren't necessarily scholars or geniuses.
And one of the really wonderful things about collecting is that sometimes people collect things that everybody else considers junk or rubbish.
And that's the only reason that survives is because this particular person saw merit in keeping it.
And its importance was discovered in later generations because somebody had the foresight or the passion or the whatever to save it.
And because it was saved, people can rediscover it.
And I think you do find that.
I mean, I tell a very cute story in the book about this Michael Zinman who acquired, I mean, it's a funny story, and this enormous collection of pornography.
He had no interest in it, but it was offered to him, and he said, why did he buy it?
Well, because the dollars were right, and it was probably comprehensive.
When he saw it, it was horrible, and he was ashamed even to send it off to the landfill.
He tried to get rid of it quietly, and lo and behold, what happens?
The University of Texas, the Humanities Research Center in Austin, has all the papers of a Lyndon Johnson commission which studied pornography, but they had no examples of this material.
And so they took this collection and they entered it there, and what you have is as abhorrent and as worthless as this material is, nevertheless, it does have a function as an artifact.
And if somebody didn't...
preserve this at some point, you wouldn't have this material to study.
I mean, it is important, I think, that you preserve the horrible things along with the beautiful things.
I mean, there are extraordinary collections of material coming out of the Third Reich and Holocaust material.
As abhorrent as they are, it's essential that they be preserved and available to scholars.
I don't know if that's responsive to a particular question, but in any case,
Grant County, go ahead.
Hi.
Wonderful program.
A zillion thoughts running through my mind, maybe just a few for you.
First, I'd like to publicly thank my wife for letting me indulge in this passion.
She is the woman who keeps me in check.
When we go on vacation, we have to plan part of our vacation around bookstore visits.
I call them bonus book days, and she lets me indulge my little passion.
I came to collecting maybe late in life for me.
when people start to settle down and have a place to put books.
I started collecting when I was about 35, and I found, like people have said along, that you sort of collect a subset of books, and I find that there are books in my collection.
I collect science and nature books, and there are things I probably would not trade for a Gutenberg Bible.
Although certain things may be valuable as books,
There are things that are just so valuable to me, whereas a Gutenberg Bible would be much more meaningful to somebody else.
I wouldn't even probably want it in my collection.
And although you said earlier on books are inanimate, I find that they are one of the main animators of me, and it is just one of my real passions, which I do have to keep in check.
The thing I'm faced with, not that I'm that old, I mean,
in my mid-forties, and I have no children, my wife and I have no children, I keep thinking, what am I going to do with all these books?
A lot of books that I acquired, at least recently in the Madison area, were from a guy who, through a variety of machinations, I traced to being a professor at one of them's neighboring colleges, and I guess he's still alive, but at a point late in his life, he decided that he was going to dispose of his collection of science and nature books.
And I own a great part of his collection, I think.
And I'm just so happy that they wound up and used bookstores, and now I can have them and use them because it's great.
So I always wonder, what am I going to do with my books when I get to the end?
I think it's the central dilemma, and I address it in the very first paragraph of my first chapter, and I come back to it in the epilogue.
What do you do with your books?
Some people give them to institutions.
Some people form libraries.
Other people send them off with the whispered hope that they'll find a happy new life in the next generation.
As long as you take care of them, they'll find a proper home.
And I think it's very commendable also that many people do
offer their books up for sale because you have to replenish the stock.
I mean, there have to be books for people to get.
And I think another thing that you touched on, which is very important, is that the beauty of book collecting, and I just can't think of any other collectible, any area of collecting or hobby where you can collect and you can find great satisfaction at any level.
Of course, if you have millions of dollars and there's a Gutenberg Bible available, which there aren't any more, you can buy one.
But you can also have a great deal of fun and derive tremendous satisfaction by spending $0.25, $0.50 at yard sales, discovering things that people consider trash.
The great story is the man who found Poe's Camerlane in an antiques barn no more than 30 miles from where I live.
I keep thinking, this should have been me.
I would have recognized this book for $15 and selling it at a
at an auction for $198,000.
I mean, these discoveries are made all the time, and you can do this at any level with great satisfaction.
I think what's important and what this gentleman just pointed out is that these are the books that have meaning for you as an individual, and that's what makes collecting so unique, is that every collection has your own signature on it because it reflects your personality and your likes and your dislikes.
And how does your collection do that for you?
Oh, in many ways.
When I started researching this book, as I said earlier in the hour, I just became impassioned about getting books on books.
Now, it's not just books on books.
It's auction catalogs.
I am a bookseller's dream.
I would go to these flea markets, and they would have these crates of old auction catalogs tattered that they would be thrilled to have me take off their hands for $5 or $10
But you find information in these things that you just can't find anyplace else, bibliographical information on certain books and titles, little historical nuggets.
These are things that I collect.
This certainly reflects my personality, my books on books, my biographies of authors.
I have a wonderful collection of literary biographies, literary criticism, and all kinds of other things.
I'm sure you don't have the time to hear outlined in great detail.
But I guess it reflects my interests and my likes and my passions, my vocation.
A book collection can do this for anybody.
You have a sense of calling about it.
I wouldn't call it a sense of mission, but I would certainly call it an obsession without question.
Well, I want to thank you for a really wonderful hour of conversation.
A description made of Isaiah Thomas.
who was one of my characters in the Americana section.
And when he died, his grandson, Benjamin Franklin Thomas, that grandfather was afflicted
From the earliest age, with this gentlest of infirmities, he was a bibliomaniac.
And, of course, the result of his particular bibliomania was formation of the American Antiquarian Society.
Wonderful.
Nicholas Besbanes, author of A Gentle Madness.
If you'd like to purchase a cassette copy of the program, the radio store number is 1-800-747-7444.
The program number is 829E.
Carmen Jackson, Produce the Hour.
I'm Jean Farocca.
Contributors to Wisconsin Public Radio include Marshall Electronics, Wisconsin's broad-line distributor of electronic components, serving the north-central region with products and resources, 800-558-1238.
Canterbury Booksellers Coffeehouse, Madison, sponsoring the fourth annual Run Walk for Literacy to benefit the Madison Literacy Council, Sunday, September 10th.
And Edgewood Orchard Galleries, Fish Creek, celebrating art and life in Door County since 1969.
We'll check news and weather next, and then after the news at 11 o'clock, Larry Mueller is in.
From heartworm problems to special diets, find the answer to questions about your pets, as Larry will talk with a UW-Madison veterinarian from 11 until 1230.